# Search and Vector Search Index Schema

This directory contains schema files representing the shapes of Atlas Search and Vector Search
indexes, including subschemas and samples.

## Description

Search and Vector Search index schema definitions conforming to the Atlas Search index management
syntax live at:

- [search/index.json](https://github.com/mongodb/mongot/blob/master/packages/search-index-schema/schema/search/index.json):
- [vectorSearch/index.json](https://github.com/mongodb/mongot/blob/master/packages/search-index-schema/schema/vectorSearch/index.json):
  _for use in the Atlas Search and Vector Search JSON Editor_

and may be used to validate an atlas search index schema using any of the
[compatible JSON validators](http://json-schema.org/implementations.html#validators).

**Note**: Strict validation is _currently_ **not
** supported as non-standard properties are present
in the schema. See [Conformance to Specification](#conformance-to-specification)

## Specification Version

This schema definition is loosely based
on [JSON specification draft-07](https://json-schema.org/draft-07/json-schema-release-notes.html).

### Conformance to Specification

Non-standard vocabulary and extensions are extensively in use throughout all subschemas. Primarily,
this departure from the standard specification is being tolerated in order to enable vs-code-like
features while using this schema to support the **renewed Atlas Search and Vector Search JSON
Editor** powered by the
[monaco library](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/). The following
_non-standard_ JSON
properties are in use:

- `defaultSnippets`: to provide a default completion item that is intended to be the appropriate
  value for a field in most scenarios and requiring intentional replacement by the user if desired.
- `errorMessage`: to override default error messages generated by the [vscode-json-languageservice](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-json-languageservice) when used in conjunction with the monaco
  library.
- `markdownDescription` : to describe schema elements in markdown format which conveniently surfaces
  as element-level documentation
- `markdownEnumDescriptions`: to describe schema elements that are part of an enum in markdown
  format.
- `suggestSortText`: to control the order of occurrence of field suggestions within JSON objects. By
  default, JSON objects are unordered and unsuitable for the **renewed Atlas
  Search and Vector Search JSON Editor**
  which surfaces autocomplete options users in an intuitive manner.

### Other schema language considerations

JSON schema is flexible and allows many ways to compose rules that developers intend to enforce.
However, the [vscode-json-languageservice](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-json-languageservice)
, an open-source library developed to supporting JSON language within the VS code IDE while
powerful, has limitations that one needs to mindful of when defining the Atlas Search Schema. The
following issues have been documented (along with workarounds in place):

#### 1. error messaging inaccuracies when using `oneOf` and `anyOf`

`oneOf` and `anyOf` allow developers to specify independent sub-schema to support acceptability of
complex and/or large objects as values for a JSON property using the `$ref` keyword. However, when a
schema intended to be used for consumption within a `anyOf` block defines top-level informative
annotations such as `title`, `description` or `markdownDescription`, the first among these are
incorrectly promoted to generate validation error messages on the property on which the `oneOf`
construct is applied. This is documented in [Issue #204](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-json-languageservice/issues/204) of vscode-json-languageService.

_Workaround_: Use `markdownEnumDescription` or `description` in the higher-level object to annotate
informative help text while ensuring that component subschema does not define top-level `title`,
`description` or `markdownDescription` fields. Please see [charFilter.json](https://github.com/mongodb/mongot/blob/master/packages/search-index-schema/schema/search/components/custom_analyzer/charFilter.json)
which defines a `oneOf` block and [htmlStrip.json](https://github.com/mongodb/mongot/blob/master/packages/search-index-schema/schema/search/components/custom_analyzer/charFilter/htmlStrip.json)
which implements one of the options for a character filter for an example of this workaround
pattern.

#### 2. validation of required fields when using `oneOf` and `anyOf`

If a `oneOf` block defines multiple acceptable schema, there may be a discriminator field that is
often required. An example is the `type` field which is a requirement on many atlas search index
components. It is to be noted that due to [Issue #205](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-json-languageservice/issues/205) of vscode-json-languageService,
the monaco editor will initially assume that the required fields for an object that is defined by
a `oneOf` block are equivalent to the required fields of the first subschema defined within the
block instead of evaluating all subschemas to identify if there are common requirements across all
subschema contributing to the oneOf block leading to incorrect validation requirements exposed
momentarily to the user. This issue disappears soon as the user selects a discriminator field but
can initially be confusing to users.

_Workaround_: If possible, choose a component that only requires the discriminating field as the
first option for `oneOf`. If such a component does not exist, it is possible to create a proxy
component to enforce the discriminator. An example of the initial workaround is available in
[tokenizer.json](https://github.com/mongodb/mongot/blob/master/packages/search-index-schema/schema/search/components/custom_analyzer/tokenizer.json#L36)

## Code organization

[search/index.json](https://github.com/mongodb/mongot/blob/master/packages/search-index-schema/schema/search/index.json)
and [vectorSearch/index.json](https://github.com/mongodb/mongot/blob/master/packages/search-index-schema/schema/vectorSearch/index.json)
are both schema definitions at the highest level and makes
references to other locally defined schemas and subschemas hierarchically organized in the
corresponding [components](https://github.com/mongodb/mongot/tree/master/packages/search-index-schema/schema/search/components)
directory accompanying this README.

## Schema Validation

Schema files added here meet the JSON specification described in
[Specification Version](#specification-version) and may be cross-validated using compatible JSON
validators. Please see validation example using [`ajv-cli`](https://ajv.js.org/) below:

```shell
cd schema/search
ajv compile -s index.json -r "components/**/*.json" --strict=false
```

should return:

```
schema index.json is valid
```
